# document-summary-tool

Hello! This project lets a user get an extractive or abstractive summary of a pdf document, a word document, or an online article. These 3 document types are used as input and the documents are extracted and processed. Once the text is processed the user then can choose a summary type and find the summary in their docs folder. I'm hoping that this can help students or professionals have a synopsis of their work or any user with necessary documents that need summarizing!

## Prerequisites
Python 3.6+
## Usage
1. Open terminal and run the program in the current working directory
2. Run the requirements.txt
```bash
pip3 install -r requirements.txt
```
3. Download the spaCy English language model
```bash
python3 -m spacy download en_core_web_sm
```
4. Run the program
```bash
python3 src/main.py
```
## More on this Summarization Tool:
### Extractive and Abstractive summaries
- An extractive summary selects key sentences and phrases from the direct text to create a collective summary based on the word frequencies and sentence importance. This summary can be implemented with several ML libraries but in this case it uses the [spaCy library](https://spacy.io/) for this implementation. This summary is best for highlighting the important parts of your text.

- An abstractive summary generates a new summary with entirely new sentences that convey a general understanding of the text. This summary utilizes more advanced techniques such as the [facebook/bart-large-cnn](https://huggingface.co/facebook/bart-large-cnn) pre-trained summarization model. This summary is best for paraphrasing and providing a cohesive summary of your entire text.

### Recommendations
- For word documents and long pdf documents (10+), the extractive method is best recommended
- For online articles and shorter pdf documents (a few pages or so), the abstractive method is best recommended
- Runtime for an extractive summary with 8443 characters: 16.64 seconds
- Runtime for an abstractive summary with 8443 characters: 48.20 seconds

### Disclaimer
1. The summaries generated by this tool are based on pre-trained models and the algorithms implemented within the spaCy and Hugging Face Transformers libraries. While these models are highly advanced, the summaries may not always perfectly capture the context or the nuances of the original text.
2. Abstractive summarization involves a more complex method and may take longer to generate a summary compared to the extractive summarization. Please be patient as the model processes the input text.
3. This tool is designed for educational and informational purposes. It is not intended for use in critical applications where the accuracy of the summary is crucial.
4. Users should always review the generated summaries and verify the content before using it for any official or critical purposes.
5. The performance and accuracy of the summarization tool may improve over time with updates to the underlying libraries and models. Users are encouraged to keep their installations up to date.

By using this tool, you agree to the terms outlined in this disclaimer. If you encounter any issues or have suggestions for improvement, please feel free to raise an issue [here](https://github.com/ablake12/doc-summary-tool/issues).

## Adapted From:
### Extractive Model:
https://medium.com/analytics-vidhya/text-summarization-using-spacy-ca4867c6b744
### Abstractive Model:
```
@article{DBLP:journals/corr/abs-1910-13461,
  author    = {Mike Lewis and
               Yinhan Liu and
               Naman Goyal and
               Marjan Ghazvininejad and
               Abdelrahman Mohamed and
               Omer Levy and
               Veselin Stoyanov and
               Luke Zettlemoyer},
  title     = {{BART:} Denoising Sequence-to-Sequence Pre-training for Natural Language
               Generation, Translation, and Comprehension},
  journal   = {CoRR},
  volume    = {abs/1910.13461},
  year      = {2019},
  url       = {http://arxiv.org/abs/1910.13461},
  eprinttype = {arXiv},
  eprint    = {1910.13461},
  timestamp = {Thu, 31 Oct 2019 14:02:26 +0100},
  biburl    = {https://dblp.org/rec/journals/corr/abs-1910-13461.bib},
  bibsource = {dblp computer science bibliography, https://dblp.org}
}
```